Daniel Dutton (born 1959 near Somerset, Kentucky)[1] is a contemporary artist, lyricist, composer, artistic director, and amateur filmmaker, whose work combines visual, musical, and narrative arts.[2][3] He is best known for his first opera, The Stone Man.[4]

During the 1980s, Dutton showed visual and video installation art at the J. B. Speed Art Museum in Louisville, Kentucky. The Speed Museum commissioned two video works from Dutton: A Day in the Life of the Artist, and Water; an installed environment. Dutton's work was featured as a one-man show in the rotunda of the US Congressional Office Building in 1985.

In 1990, Kentucky Opera premiered Dutton's first opera, The Stone Man, at the Kentucky Center for the Arts.[2] The Stone Man was followed by a four-part cycle of dance operas titled The Secret Commonwealth.[3][4] These four operas; The Changeling and the Bear,[3][5] The Road, Love and Time, and The Approach of the Mystery, were staged between 1995 and 2000.[1] The first three operas were filmed and broadcast by Kentucky Educational Television.[2]

Dutton's visual art work is displayed in the corporate art collections of the Brown-Forman Corporation, Louisville, KY and the LeBlond Machino company in Cincinnati. Also, they can be seen at the Berea College Art Museum, Berea, Kentucky, and the 21c Museum, Louisville, KY.

In 2003, Dutton was commissioned to paint a set of 12 scenes from traditional ballads by 21c Museum Hotels, Louisville, Kentucky. The paintings, along with a book and Dutton's recordings of traditional ballads, are complementary aspects of a project titled Ballads of the Barefoot Mind, which were displayed at 21c Museum in the Fall of 2006.[6]

In 2016, Dutton partnered with welder / artist Jesse Rivera to form Rivera-Dutton Sculpture Studio.[7]

Daniel Dutton lives in Somerset, Kentucky.[4] Dutton is one of the last descendants still residing in Somerset of the Dutton family whose property was the site of the Civil War Battle of Dutton Hill (also known as the Battle of Somerset). His studio is less than 1/4 mile from the Battle of Dutton's Hill Monument.

References
 "21c Museum Foundation Presents Dan Dutton's The Faun". 21c Museum. Archived from the original on 4 January 2009. Retrieved 13 February 2010.
 "Painting in Pulaski (Kentucky Life)". Kentucky Educational Television. Retrieved 4 February 2010.
 Minton, David (2000-04-23). "Never Fear, There's Always More To See". Lexington Herald-Leader. p. J6. Dutton is a musician, performer, writer of folk-rock operas, amateur filmmaker and the force behind a group of dancers, actors and musicians called The Secret Commonwealth. His first "opera" was The Changeling and the Bear, and the soundtrack was nominated for a Grammy, according to Riverstone co-owner Ken Wesley. Dutton has written two other operas since then, which have been staged in Somerset, Richmond and Northern Kentucky.
 Nance, Kevin (1994-12-11). "Somerset Man Tries Another Ambitious Work; Daniel Dutton Now Writing 4-Part Opera". Lexington Herald-Leader. p. H1. Daniel Dutton is back. The self-taught composer-writer-painter from Somerset is best known for The Stone Man, an uncategorizeable musical stage work produced by the Kentucky Opera in Louisville that toured throughout the state five years ago. Now, Dutton, 35, is in the midst of a project that is even harder to pigeonhole and far more ambitious: a four-part, eight-hour, pop-folk opera called The Secret Commonwealth.
 "The Graveyard". Kentucky Educational Television. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 13 February 2010.
 "Dan Dutton: Ballads of the Barefoot Mind". 21c Museum. Archived from the original on 14 March 2010. Retrieved 13 February 2010.
 "About". Archived from the original on 2017-01-04.
Other sources
Tagami, Ty, "MUSICAL AMBASSADOR - MAKER OF RARE JAPANESE LUTE WILL PLAY IN SOMERSET", Lexington Herald, 20 February 1999. p. A1: "Ohashi came to Somerset to visit friends and to perform with local artist Daniel Dutton, whom he met in Japan two years ago. Dutton traveled to Japan in 1997 with a Japanese couple living in Somerset, playing old Appalachian ballads on dulcimer and guitar for a Japanese audience. Dutton, who is the artistic director and musical composer for the opera, invited Ohashi to come to Kentucky and open the show."
Unk, "'SECRET' GETTING EASIER TO FIGURE OUT", Lexington Herald, 14 February 1999, p. J3: "Daniel Dutton hopes people will leave the world premiere of Love & Time - the third in his series of four opera-modern dance productions called The Secret Commonwealth saying: "I kind of understand what was happening there." The Somerset-based director/composer knows he has tested audiences with the first two chapters: The Changeling and the Bear and The Road.


Dan Dutton: Ballads of the Barefoot Mind
October 2006 - January 6, 2007
atrium gallery
21c Museum will host a solo exhibition of works by Kentucky artist Dan Dutton as part of its upcoming “Ballads of the Barefoot Mind” exhibit. The display will highlight the artist’s collection of ballad stories, sounds and images.

The “Ballads of the Barefoot Mind” exhibit will open on Friday, October 6 at 7:30 p.m. at 21c Museum with an impromptu performance by Dan Dutton. He will also present a concert at 21c on Saturday, October 7 at 7:30 p.m., where the artist will record 12 of his ballads. The concert will also feature special guests Atwater-Donnelly, Cari Norris, Susan Alcorn and Mark McCoy. Throughout the weekend, Proof on Main restaurant at 21c will offer a prix fixe menu inspired by the lyrics of Dutton’s ballads.

Following the opening weekend events, 21c Museum will also host a special concert on Wednesday, November 8 at 2:00 p.m. The performance, “Ballads Between Life and Death,” is held in conjunction with Louisville's Festival of Faiths, and refreshments will be provided by Proof. 

Dutton’s exhibit features 12 large-scale oil paintings of ballad scenes which former Whitney Museum of Art curator Lawrence Rinder described in the catalog essay as “monumental and epic.” Accompanying the large paintings are 12 ink and watercolor images from Dutton’s repertoire of 36 ballads, sound recordings and live performances.

In the 1980s Dutton was commissioned to create video installation art for the J.B. Speed Museum in Louisville and to create an opera premiered by Kentucky Opera at the Center for the Arts in 1990.  During the 90s, Dutton composed, designed, and directed a cycle of four dance operas in collaboration with and broadcast by Kentucky Educational Television.  KET's video documents are still used by the public school system in Kentucky, and part one of the opera was nominated for an Emmy.


Still Thinking it Over?
Don’t Miss Out on Your Stay!
Send the details of your stay straight to your inbox so you can review, share, and book when you’re ready. It only takes a second!

Enter your email address
Send Me My Stay Info
Skip to content
Live
Stay
Shop & Dine
About
Events
News
Gallery
View Real Estate
Book Your Stay
9581 E. County Hwy 30A
Alys Beach, Florida 32461

General: 850-213-5500
Rentals: 850-213-5555
Sales: 850-213-5526
Close
Live
Stay
About
Events
Shop & Dine
Gallery
News
Beach Cam
Location
Alys Gazette
Search
Photography Policy
Alys Shoppe
Art, People
The Artists of Alys Beach: Dan Dutton

At Alys Beach we celebrate art in all its forms. Whether created in nature or
by the hands of skilled artisans, art enlivens our community and connects to
a sense of place. In this edition of the Artists of Alys Beach, we spend time in
Somerset, Kentucky, with Dan Dutton, the sculptor who created the bronze
turtles along Turtle Bale Spring.

As a young boy, Dan Dutton sat in his back yard, beating flat a muffin tin with a
hammer. It was his first piece of art, he recalls explaining matter-of-factly to his mother who watched from the kitchen door on his family’s 200-year-old farm in Somerset, Kentucky. With his hammering he kept sharp tempo alongside a secret droning melody held within the Appalachian Mountains; the beat moving with the echoes of his ancestors through the trees and over the hills. In that moment of creative endeavor it became clear that in his five or six short years, he had already become a part of something greater than himself. There’s a music—a narrative, perhaps—native to Appalachia. An art that is innately tuned within Dan that has shaped how he sees the world, whether that world is southern Appalachia, in tea garden in Japan, or along the pedestrian paths of Alys Beach. He is an artist in every sense of his being, excelling across multiple media as a self-taught composer, painter, sculptor, and designer. His ability to find depth and meaning, even a bit of whimsy, in the world around him is inspiring.





“Both of my parents were farmers,” says Dan. “They were devoted to the land, but, and maybe because of this, they appreciated beauty and art.”

“Both of my parents were farmers,” says Dan. “They were devoted to the land, but, and maybe because of this, they appreciated beauty and art.” That appreciation has developed into an utter passion for Dan, one that knows no bounds. It seems to give him a sense of duty, fresh each day when he wakes and swings wide the door to his old family home, to seek beauty that lies within everything around him, and from that to create. For Dan, to step outside (often barefoot) and walk to his pig pen to feed the piglets is an opportunity in and of itself to bring meaning to life and art into what would otherwise be a mundane task of life. To view the world with such whimsy and wisdom is not something simply attained, but rather, built into a person from his beginning, and perhaps even before that.



“In the Appalachian Mountains, and especially in Kentucky, there is a history of long story-songs that originate back in the 1600s in Scotland and Ireland. ‘Murder ballads,’ as they were called,” explains Dan. “As a child, I remember my parents and older people in my community singing these songs. I can remember closing my eyes and listening to them, and I’d see the story like a film. I was seeing it as a visual, imagined and embodied thing, and that was the reason I was driven toward recreating that internal experience in the real world.”



Dan, who had no formal art training, soon moved from muffin tin art-making to
further extensions of his creativity. He began selling paintings when he was just fourteen years old. By the time he was seventeen, he had built his first studio and was making a living doing what he loved on his own terms. For some, the success attained in both sculpture and painting may have been enough. But his unique perspective on the world allowed him to pursue another avenue of expression. At the age of 29, Dan composed and produced the first of nine operas.



Theater director. Opera composer. Ceramist. Artist in Residence. Set Designer.
Sculptor. Painter. Costume Designer. None of these things are at all disparate to Dan. These tactile and sculptural experiences are simply the expressions of a mind keenly aware that art can and does reside everywhere. That every detail carries within it deep meaning and inherent beauty.

These tactile and sculptural experiences are simply the expressions of a mind keenly aware that art can and does reside everywhere. That every detail carries within it deep meaning and inherent beauty.

So as Dan walks his property, walked by his ancestors before him and laden with storied voices, the world around him is truly a canvas. His own touch is sprinkled throughout the grounds: moss gardens inspired by his twelve years in Japan studying the sacred tea ceremony, stacked-rock statues, and metalwork sculptures all built here in his creative oasis of acreage. Dan has both a painting studio and a sculpture studio on his property, and he is building a new studio whose grand proportions will rival his own artistic vision. In a 40 by 80 foot building with 16-foot ceilings, Dan and his sculpting partner, Jesse Rivera, will take their work to new heights.
___________________

“I lived in Chicago for a season where I worked as artist in residence for Rookwood Pottery, creating a line of ceramics as they prepared to bring their work back to the market,” says Dan.

It’s during his time in Chicago that Dan met Jesse, a metal worker and highly
skilled welder. The unlikely duo has decades separating their ages, hundreds of miles between their hometowns, and each has a history that connects them to the craft in an entirely different way. But their mutual appreciation for art and their nearly-eccentric insistence on perfecting the details led them to imagine what they could create together. Jesse left an urban life in Chicago and now works with Dan in a 200-year-old carriage-house-turned-painting-studio. They are creating a stunning collection of metal sculpture, some of which has found its way 650 miles from Somerset, Kentucky, to Turtle Bale pedestrian path, just a few blocks over from Somerset Street in Alys Beach.


“When Ben Page of Page|Duke asked me to do this project, he could have hardly known how much affection for turtles I held as a child,” laughs Dan, as he reminisces about how he studied them throughout the years, the way they moved, and the details of their being. “Since boyhood, growing up in rural Kentucky, I have always been an amateur aficionado of animals. I studied the natural sciences nearly as closely as I do the arts. The two are inherently connected, and all created, visual imagery
ultimately springs from the natural world.”

“I studied the natural sciences nearly as closely as I do the arts. The two are inherently connected, and all created, visual imagery
ultimately springs from the natural world.”


At one point in the design process, Ben asked Dan if he could, perhaps, make the turtles a bit more…whimsical. Dan laughs as he reflects on that request: “I am the king of whimsy!”

That joyful perspective is one that has grown a prolific career in the arts from a small, storied corner of Kentucky. Dan’s view of the world is grown out of a history of interacting with the natural environment and exploring the beauty and delight that is found within the ordinary. It seems quite fitting that whimsy rises from that rich foundation of history, that Dan can look at anything and everything around him and smile and say, “this, too, is art.”

You May Also Like
View the Archive

People
Fall/Winter 2020
Mobilizing Hope
In 1979, Don Schoendorfer was on vacation in Morocco when he encountered a sight he…

Art, Food & Beverage
Winter 2021
Artists of Alys
Throughout the world, food is a keystone—a touchpoint of humanity through which we express our…


Dan Dutton, Part 1 – “The Sweet Music of the Chase”
August 3, 2015 Patrick Blackman
Tobacco - Dan Dutton, 1984 - oil on board - private collection - a painting of the last crop of tobacco on the Dutton family farm
Tobacco – Dan Dutton, 1984 – oil on board – private collection – a painting of the last crop of tobacco on the Dutton family farm – See Dan Dutton’s portfolio here.

Somerset is in the Knobs of Kentucky, and if you live among those hills you know that the red clay you can find thereabouts is perfect for spurring a child’s imagination.  One of Somerset’s native sons, who grew up making things from that earth, is artist and musician Dan Dutton.

I recently contacted Dan to get his permission to use some of his visual art in a post about the ballad “The Farmer’s Curst Wife.” In the exchange that followed, I discovered quickly that the ballad tradition is deeply important to Dan and his art. The perspectives he shared with me, and the images of his work I found online, convinced me to share all that with you.

We found much to talk about, so I’m going to lay this on you all this over two different posts.  Today we’ll focus on Dan’s personal connections to the ballad tradition and his mentors – among the most revered by folked up people like us. Later this month in the second part of this interlude, we’ll look at the intersection of traditional balladry, including murder ballads, and Dan’s visual and performing arts.  Throughout, you will see him comfortable with – indeed inspired by – walking that line between worlds both old and new.

“The Sweet Music of the Chase”
My first questions to Dan centered on home and family, and in his answers he described the powerful influences of both on his life and work.

Dan Dutton
Dan Dutton

“Ilive on the remnants of a lovely old family farm a couple of miles from the border of the smallish town of Somerset … the only remnant of the Dutton family still living here … The hills of the farm have outcrops of limestone, packed with fossils, and scatterings of geodes coming up through the earth, which tends toward red clay … There are a few decent springs that we got our water from when I was a child. The woods are mature, with a lot of beeches, oaks, hickories and maples. Because this farm is a bit of an oasis in a now more developed area, it is thick with birds and wildlife in general …  I have a big garden, a bunch of chickens, some guineas and lately two ducks.  That’s about what’s left of farming – I love the farming life, but I’m an artist and you can only do so much!

Nature, in the sense of the plants and creatures and their life cycles … the births, deaths, joys, and struggles of farming, were the things that surrounded me, interwoven with my family life … that was the material of my imagination, and the continual subjects of my art. I began painting when I was three, started making up songs and tunes when I was about five or six, and I’ve never stopped for any length of time …  I was allowed time to make art and I made the most of it. I’m happier when I can spend a lot of time outdoors and I spent much of my childhood alone in the woods, deep in my imagination, in communication, I was sure, with the forces of nature that surrounded me.”

The sort of farming that Dan grew up with was labor intensive, but it instilled a respect for tradition that still informs his art, even as he pursues it with an experimental eye.  As well, music was a core part of his family’s daily life.

Fox on the Town-O - Dan Dutton, 1986 - acrylic and pigment on wood cutouts
Fox on the Town-O – Dan Dutton, 1986
acrylic and pigment on wood cutouts

“My parents were farmers to the core and they loved pretty much everything about it, to the extent that they favored older ways of farming than were typical around here during the ’60s and ’70s when I was growing up. My Dad had a pair of salt and pepper workhorses – he had a small tractor, and used it a lot, but he just liked fooling with horses. He showed me some of the old ways of doing things – how to build haystacks that will repel rain, how to plow with horses, etc. He was a fox hunter and kept a large pack of hounds that he called with a horn. This was the so-called “night hunting” type of fox hunting where the fox is never killed, almost never seen. My Dad would never have killed a fox – probably not even if it got in the chickens – well, maybe then. He hunted for what he called “the sweet music of the chase” – it was a listening sport, and a tale telling one.

My Mom was a card – a prankster and one of the busiest and funniest people I’ve ever known, as well as an amazing cook and gardener. Both of my parents were good singers, and we sang all the time when we were working. They knew some ballads and old traditional songs, hymns, some things from the ’30s and ’40s – my Mom even sang a Kurt Weill song on occasion. This was never performance, strictly speaking, we sang for our own enjoyment …  My Mom claimed that on my first Christmas … my sister Sarah would take me into the bedroom, teach me a Christmas song, bring me out and I would sing for everyone, then she’d take me back and teach me another ~ so according to her I was singing pretty well at 11 months of age. I believe her, because I can’t remember a pre-singing period in my life.”

Dan Dutton, Part 1 – “The Sweet Music of the Chase”
August 3, 2015 Patrick Blackman
<<<Back to page 1
“A Pair of Sassy Singing Boots”
Barbara Ellen - Dan Dutton, 2006 - ink and watercolor
Barbara Ellen – Dan Dutton, 2006 – ink and watercolor

Dan’s stories about his entrée into the world of ballads are enlightening. From his parents to mentors like Jean Ritchie, he learned the old a Capella tradition in the best way a kid in a new electric world might.

“Ilearned the traditional ballads first from my parents. My Mom sang “Barbara Ellen” & “Babes in the Woods”, my Dad sang “The Fox on the Town-O.” Later when I began to learn songs from other singers in the community, I found out that they knew other, more recent, ballads as well, but had forgotten about them until I would bring them up ~ such as “Rose Conalee” and “Floyd Collins.” I didn’t think of the ballads as separate or even different from the other songs that we sang. I remember memorizing Nancy Sinatra’s “These Boots Were Made for Walking” when I was pretty little, because I was sure that it was about a pair of sassy singing boots. That put it right in with the fairy tales and ballads that my parents knew.”



Certainly though, Dan learned the most from people steeped in the tradition – older people who were busy with finding ways to pass it on to kids like him, hoping they might preserve it. Jean Ritchie was the first of several such mentors. Dan was more than eager to learn, though his idea of preservation wasn’t always what his teachers had in mind.

“I was fifteen, I think, when I first heard Jean sing at the first Berea Craft Fair … I was awestruck … completely infatuated … every time that she sang in Kentucky thereafter, if I could be there I was. I would take her bouquets of carefully chosen wildflowers and I think that may have been why she put up with me and all my questions. I got the Smithsonian recordings of her ballads, and everything else she had recorded and started memorizing the entire lot. I got a copy of the first volume of Child’s collection, bought an unplayable dulcimer from a local music store, picked out “The Two Sisters” to start with, and went down to sit on the roots of a giant sycamore in the edge of the branch to figure out how to play it. I was sure that I could, even though I was clueless as to how to begin, but I did know that I needed an isolated and romantically mystical location to have the right setting for evoking what I considered an ancient sound. That ancient sound, which to my ears the modal tunes of the ballads had the most of, was the main thing I was after …



I was in my twenties when Jean taught a class at Berea in Appalachian music, and you can bet I had wormed my way into that class, even though I had a hugely swollen foot from being bitten by a copperhead the day before it began. By the time we had spent a week together, we had become pretty close, considering the difference in our ages, and to a certain extent our aims. Jean was a musical conservative (especially when it came to her tunes!) and although I appreciate the wonderful things that that approach has preserved, my feeling for the ballads was and is that they must incorporate and process every cultural change in order to truly live on. Both approaches are important in that sense – sometimes Jean and I would fuse and sometimes we would clash. In retrospect I marvel at her generosity in taking time to sing entire ballads just for me to hear, as she understood how much a ballad singer learns from hearing a complete performance, especially one on one … even more so since she had every reason to expect that I might change the tune, change the harmonization, change the words, paint it, make it into a ceramic design.

Dan Dutton and Jean Ritchie - ca. 1980s
Dan Dutton and Jean Ritchie – ca. 1980s

I think she had respect for what I was doing, but it annoyed her sometimes too, to the point of rolling her eyes at least once. After I went over to her place in Viper a few times, I started driving over there to play poker with her sisters, who would fleece me for every bit of money I had, one quarter at a time, because they all could sing as well. And I visited with Edna May in Winchester quite a bit and she taught me several songs. Jean taught me to play the dulcimer, “bum-biddy-bum” – holding my hand in hers to show the way that the pick (she recommended cutting your own out of plastic coffee can lids, the transparent ones having the preferred thickness, and I still do) can dance in threes or twos on the drones and chanter strings.

… I already thought of myself as a composer, and my other musical idol, along with Jean, was the Russian composer Igor Stravinsky. I was learning to play the dulcimer, and I was cutting up cassette tapes with a razor blade and assembling the bits back together to make “musique concrete” – trying to figure out (alone) what jazz is, ordering field recordings of African Pygmies and Japanese Noh music, and making field recordings myself, since I was obviously an ethnomusicologist too.”


Dan Dutton, Part 1 – “The Sweet Music of the Chase”
August 3, 2015 Patrick Blackman
<<<Back to page 2
Stump Singers, Love Songs, and Wild Living
Dan’s relationship with Jean was clearly special, and served as a strong foundation.  But he sought other mentors in his pursuit of that “ancient sound” as well.

“Loyal Jones, then at the Appalachian Center at Berea College, knew a bit of what I was up to concerning traditional music and told me that there was supposedly a ballad singer, Chappel Wallin, still living in southern Kentucky. I found him … I guess I had in mind some remote farm back in a holler, and that it might take a lot of sleuthing to find him, so I was surprised, if a bit deflated, to find Chappel in the phone book. I called, explained that I was interested in old songs and wondered if he would consider talking to me, and he very graciously said yes, and “I haven’t sung them old love songs in I don’t know how long. What is it (to his wife) 10 years?” Chappel didn’t use the word ballad, and it took me a bit to realize that all the ballads were categorized as “old love songs” – in contrast to the gospel quartet music he sang at the time I met him, age 89.

I took my tape recorder to snag his ballads; a pretty amazing set.  I had a really good field recorder, a Nakamichi, and a decent microphone, which I set up after we’d had a few pleasantries and I had explained what I was after. I did notice that his wife seemed nervous for some reason, but she was otherwise very kind and hospitable. Chappel said, loudly (which was his normal volume level) – “Does that thing hear me?” I told him that it heard him just fine.

Lord Bateman - Dan Dutton, 2006, ink and watercolor
Lord Bateman – Dan Dutton, 2006
ink and watercolor

His method of conveying the set of ballads he sang for me was a new experience, especially compared with Jean’s somewhat scholarly and objective approach. Chappel had me sit knee to knee with him, slapping time (hard) on my thigh, and singing in a very loud voice … booming and highly dramatic. Each phrase would have a pounding 1/1 beat with the verse and an intentionally suspenseful pause at the end. He sang six ballads for me that first visit, including a very interesting text for “Lord Bateman.” At the end of each ballad he would make an explanatory comment about the story of the ballad, usually to point out the motivations of the characters. His wife sat quietly on a chair in the room, watching carefully and still seeming nervous about something.

On the tape, at a point after telling that he hadn’t sung any of those old love songs in 10 years, he tells that although he sang them for his kids they were “always too busy at something to learn them.” I think this pained him a bit – being a singer was an identity that Chappel was proud of, and although he loved “old hymn pieces” it seemed to me that he thought the ballads were something special, that it took a special kind of singer to learn and perform them, and I believe that also. The lack of interest by younger generations, and the sense of loss that the ignoring of something once considered a treasure, now merely old in an uninteresting way, was commented on by almost every traditional singer that I learned from. It is, as Hazel Dickens pointed out, hard to tell the singer from the song.

It wasn’t until I met his sister-in-law, Berzilla (in her 90s) and his nephew, Doug Wallin, that I developed a theory as to why Chappel’s wife was so nervous about him singing “them old love songs.” Chappel, according to Doug, had been quite a rounder, and ballad singing was just one aspect of wild living that at least once landed him in jail. I decided that his wife was a bit worried that the return of the old love songs might bring the wild ways of Chappel’s younger days with them! Chappel told me that one of the jobs he had had was as a stump singer. He would climb up on a stump, no doubt of the giant old growth trees being logged and cleared back then, and sing ballads in that booming voice, which would have carried a long ways in those quieter days, until a crowd would gather to listen. Then he would turn the stump over to the politician who had hired him.

Doug and Berzilla Wallin - Photographer unknown
Doug and Berzilla Wallin
Photographer unknown

When I met Doug and Berzilla, I introduced myself and told them that I had learned some songs from Chappel. They immediately set about conveying two songs to me. Doug sang “The Darby Ram,” a song I was very eager to learn, and which I was able to memorize in a single hearing … Berzilla sang a wonderful song for me, one I had never heard of, but I forgot the words and the melody almost immediately. So it goes. Sheila Kay Adams was singing in a park about an hour’s drive from my home and I happened to decide to go and hear her … and we talked a bit afterwards about ballad singing. I mentioned Chappel Wallin to her and asked her if she’d like a copy of the recording I had made. She was keen on that, as she had learned much of her traditional material from Dellie Chandler Norton, Berzilla’s sister. Like myself, and perhaps most ballad singers who learn in the oral tradition, Sheila had run into this catch: by the time you are ready as a singer to learn the ballads, your mentors are starting to forget them. She had a tantalizing ballad text that she had copied down from Dellie which she believed might be the only American version of “The Grey Cock,” but alas, Dellie could remember nothing of the tune, and Sheila had long given up hope of singing that rare bird. When she listened to the recording of Chappel that I sent her, she called me in high excitement. I had never paid much attention to the snippet of a ballad that Chappel started to sing and immediately stumbled on, as he couldn’t remember even a whole stanza of the text – (one line he obviously made up on the spot to fill in a gap) – but Sheila could hardly believe her ears. Even with the stumbles and inserted invention, he gave enough of the tune to completely reconstruct the ballad.

Death of a Ballad Singer - Dan Dutton, 1984 - acrylic pigment on linen - private collection
Death of a Ballad Singer – Dan Dutton, 1984 – acrylic pigment on linen – private collection

It seemed like a miracle, and in a way it was.

I didn’t get to visit Chappel too many times before his daughter called me and told me that he had passed away, and tearfully asked if I still had a copy of the tape I had made of him singing. They had nothing of his music, or even his voice, even though it was central to his identity, and his daughter at least was involved somewhat in music herself, running a music store catering to gospel music performers. After I promised her that I would make her a copy of the tape and hung up the phone, I had an image in my mind of a painting that would become “Death of a Ballad Singer” – based somewhat on Hieronymus Bosch’s “Death of a Miser.” In it the skeleton Death reaches for but cannot catch the bird-soul form of music flying from the dead man through an open window, into the unknown beyond.

Tape recorders can produce ghosts, and maybe that’s the best thing they are able to do. What is the difference, really, between an ethnomusicologist and Andy Warhol? And how much is tradition dependent on repetition?”

Coda – Tape Recorders and Ghosts
Dan’s last comments in the previous section set us up well for our next post. In that one, we’ll focus more on the intersection between Dan’s music and visual art, and we’ll explore that creative tension between tradition and innovation that fascinates him.  For now, his reflections on the interactions he described above give us a good stopping point and transition.

“Ithink a lot of people that I met in what was called the “folk music” world were hoping that I would drop all the other interests and focus on being an old timey ballad singer, a concept that I was, and still am, very skeptical of, since it begs the question of what a ballad singer is. I really couldn’t understand the consternation in the story Jean told me about Bob Dylan’s infamous performance at the Newport festival that wigged Pete Seeger out – after all they were all dependent on electricity, microphones and audio speakers at that point.

My experiments with tape recording and electronic music had convinced me that the use of any of those devices was an absolute division from the traditions that the material originated in, and that the mode of presentation, partly growing out of Rock & Roll and Tin Pan Alley, had very little to do with the way we sang ballads when we were stripping tobacco. Forms are transferable sure, but form, as they say, follows function – the voice recorded, or amplified has (for me) only a barely passing resemblance to the experience of what could be called “pre-electric” music, a music that few people today know anything, if anything, about, at least not in our culture.

After, or perhaps right along, with electricity came nostalgia for its absence and I think that was part of the glamour of what was called folk music during the ’60s & ’70s, and is still today. Jean’s mode of presentation was much about evoking and controlling that nostalgia for things past. I wasn’t quite ready to agree that they were past …  Maybe I just should say that the genre title itself became very suspicious to me – even when applied admiringly I can’t help but think it is classist, trivializing, and descriptive of nothing in particular.

Either we’re all folks or none of us are.”



Daniel Dutton is a contemporary artist, lyricist, composer, artistic director, and amateur filmmaker, whose work combines visual, musical, and narrative arts. He is best known for his first opera, The Stone Man.
During the 1980s, Dutton showed visual and video installation art at the J. B. Speed Art Museum in Louisville, Kentucky. The Speed Museum commissioned two video works from Dutton: A Day in the Life of the Artist, and Water; an installed environment. Dutton's work was featured as a one-man show in the rotunda of the US Congressional Office Building in 1985.
In 1990, Kentucky Opera premiered Dutton's first opera, The Stone Man, at the Kentucky Center for the Arts. The Stone Man was followed by a four-part cycle of dance operas titled The Secret Commonwealth. These four operas; The Changeling and the Bear, The Road, Love and Time, and The Approach of the Mystery, were staged between 1995 and 2000. The first three operas were filmed and broadcast by Kentucky Educational Television.
Dutton's visual art work is displayed in the corporate art collections of the Brown-Forman Corporation, Louisville, KY and the LeBlond Machino company in Cincinnati.


Daniel Dutton's Ballad Paintings

BY LAWRENCE RINDER

Monumental, narrative, and enclosed in heavy frames of carved and painted wood, Dan Dutton’s cycle of twelve ballad paintings appears like something from another time, another place. The ballads themselves, of course, do come to us via Dutton’s new recordings — from ages past, from the early settlements of the Appalachian Mountains and, in advance of their appearance in the New World, from ancient England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Some of these lyrics, or at least the tales they tell — equally antique, can be traced to the towns and villages of West Africa. The actual maturity of these songs is tempered by their having been adopted in more recent times as signifiers of an ideal past. In nineteenth-century Great Britain, the ballads, along with other manifestations of “folk”culture, were resurrected by poets and painters in search of a remedy to industrialization’s ruination of land and culture. More recently, the 1960s folk revival in America adopted this body of songs as part of a back-to-the-land ethos that implicitly questioned the “advances” of modernity. So, as much as we might like to see and feel these works as part of the fabric of the present moment; as Dutton hopes we will — we do so only with the knowledge that they are weighted not only with imagery from the past but with the very idea of the past itself.

Dutton has chosen to paint the ballads in keeping with the spirit of their nineteenth-century revival. English painters such as Edward Burne-Jones, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and John Everett Millais — some of whom were ballad composers themselves — combined indigenously English subject matter (Arthurian legends, fairy tales, ballads, and romantic fables like the apocryphal story of Ossian) with academic painting techniques derived from Italian masters. Drawing on similar themes, Dutton describes his painting technique in terms that would have been familiar to Titian: “(I) cover the canvas with a coat of reddish brown, draw with dark brown, then develop the contours with white and monochrome browns until its like a sepia photo. The colors are then laid on in transparent layers.”

Stylistically, his paintings share a nineteenth-century English penchant for pattern and decoration. It was common to the coterie that developed around William Morris, for example, to give as much attention to the frame as to the image. Art and craft for Morris and his followers were not estranged and their union was seen as signifying the union of art and life. So much what has come to constitute our various Modernisms (openness to the unconscious, emphasis on the thing-ness of artistic forms, and the inter-penetration of art and design) originated in the work of Morris and the Pre-Raphaelites, yet their motivation derived largely from a rejection of modern life and their inspiration came predominantly from the distant past and far away lands. Morris, for example, a social utopian, had to travel as far as the wintry wastes of Iceland, to discover regenerative cultural fuel in that tiny country’s surviving Norse-age sagas.

Dutton’s anthology of ballads grows out of a conviction akin to these artists, that in the past lie the seeds of salvation for our time. While Morris bravely sought to transform contemporary society with his ante-industrial ethos, Dutton perhaps more keenly sees that the only path left for the utopian soul today is the path of the hermit. Indeed, in his own Kentucky abode, Dutton has created a private sanctuary; which he only half jokingly refers to as Dandyland — that could easily be mistaken for the setting of one of the ballads he depicts: a heavy-beamed lodge set in an ancient forest dappled with hidden meadows and ponds.

Those of my generation (I’m 44) or older, might also relate to Dutton’s paintings not only in terms of an abstract historical past, but also in light of the past of our own childhoods. His images recall the illustrations that accompanied children’s books of a certain age, some of which were still on nursery shelves thirty or forty years ago. Washington Irving’s Rip Van Winkle with illustrations by Arthur Rackham (originally published in 1905) supplied the images of my own young fantasies and my favorite of Dutton’s ballad paintings (The Frog’s Courtship, The Farmer’s Curst Wife, and The Fox) echo that artist’s dizzying, lurid displays. Rackham specialized in images both technically adroit and thematically rich. I could stare at one of his illustrations for hours on end, lost in a fairytale reverie. In his work, the nuance and complexity of detail was intrinsic to the limitless richness of the tale being told. Dutton adopts this holistic approach to narrative image-making; an approach that embodies the particular kind of fascination of a child: our sense of his ballad paintings relies as much on the panoply of plants and flowers (many of which are Kentucky natives) surrounding his protagonists as on the stature of the heroes themselves. )Perhaps it’s just in the nature of a tale to unfold in a setting, a setting that may or may not sit still as the narrative passes by.) I cannot see these paintings without seeing my own childhood, and knowing that it is gone.

Insofar as these paintings depend on and evoke the past, they can be comprehended in similar terms to Roland Barthes’ understanding of the photograph, that is, as mementi mori. Because of its intrinsic connection (via light) to the thing it depicts, a photograph is incontestably “real,” yet, by shifting this reality to the past (“this-has-been”), the photograph suggests that it is already dead. Dutton’s paintings — as well as the ballads from which they derive —are like photographs except that their medium of recording and transmission is not light but lyric. Like photographs they combine an originary flash (a broken heart, a frightened child, a heroic man) with the capacity for infinite repetition. To paraphrase Barthes, the effect of hearing a ballad is not to restore what has been abolished (by time, by distance) but to attest that what I hear has indeed existed.

Despite all I have said concerning the past in Dutton’s ballad paintings, there is a current in them that flows in the opposite direction. Perhaps it is more apparent in the ballad recordings themselves, in which one clearly hears a tone of voice that is immediate and familiar. In his singing, Dutton never affects an archaic style. Instead he sounds like someone who has just put down their cell phone or taken your order at Starbucks. His voice is recognizably of our time, as is his instrumentation. The ancient ballad lyrics are transformed and sung to us in a voice we can understand. In the paintings this contemporaneity is a bit harder to see, at least at first. This is because, I think, visual style in art has become more periodized than musical style. In music we are much more used to repetition, interpretation, and sampling. Think of Dvorak’s New World Symphony, which, although based on folk melodies, would have sounded thoroughly of-the-moment to the audiences that heard its New York premiere in 1893. Where in Dutton’ s painting is this tone of voice that speaks of our familiar present? It is, I think, in the bodies of his men. These are not the bodies of timeless legend nor of Appalachian tale. Broad-shouldered, narrow-hipped, and muscular, they are the bodies of men who workout at gyms, who look good in suits, and who may love other men.

Sensual love between men is overt in only one of Dutton’s ballad paintings, Gypsy Johnny, an image that he has, delightfully, given a twist to. The ballad originally told of an affair between a run-away squire’s wife and a singing gypsy. This was a crime in 17th century Scotland, and the punishment was hanging for the gypsy, disgrace for the upper class woman. In Dutton’s Gypsy Johnny the subjects defy an equivalent and contemporary prejudice. Dutton reports that despite searching high and low he never found an instance of two men kissing in a ballad. Yet, same-sex attraction courses through these paintings. It is likely that this has to do with the predilections of the artist as well as his personal romantic history. Indeed, he has layered many of these ballads over the stories of his own affairs, and cast his lovers as the leading men. How could he have done otherwise? To sing a song is to occupy it and, especially in the case of ballads, occupying a song means making it your own. Ballads are more than a cultural patrimony, they are an affirmation of common human experience, an affirmation that must be made again and again, generation after generation in order to take hold. Only because the singers actually felt what they sang, do we know that what ballads tell us is true: that love and cruelty sit side by side in the human heart. To be true to the form, Dutton had to sing his heart, had to paint his heart.

...

Lawrence Rinder was appointed Anne and Joel Ehrenkranz Curator of Contemporary Art at the Whitney Museum of American Art in May 2000. Recent exhibitions at the Whitney include "The American Effect," an exploration of global perceptions of America in art made since 1990. He was chief curator of the 2002 Whitney Biennial, served as an advisor on the 1991 and 1993 Biennials, and was one of six curators of the 2000 Biennial.

Prior to his position at the Whitney, Rinder was founding director of the CCA Wattis Institute for Contemporary Arts. While at the college, he organized several exhibitions, including the groundbreaking "Searchlight: Consciousness at the Millennium" (1999) and "Fabrice Hybert: At Your Own Risk" (1999).

From 1988 to 1998, he worked at the Berkeley Art Museum (BAM) in a variety of positions including curator of 20th-century art and curator of the museum's MATRIX program, an ongoing series of contemporary art exhibitions. Among the many exhibitions he organized for BAM are "Louise Bourgeois: Drawings" (1996), "In a Different Light" (1995) and "Andrea Fraser: Aren't They Lovely?" (1992).

Rinder received a BA in art from Reed College and an MA in art history from Hunter College. He has held teaching positions at UC Berkeley and Deep Springs College and is currently adjunct professor of art history and archaeology at Columbia University.



